[MUSIC]
Let us now explore some basic Git
commands that are very useful for
us in this specialization.
There is lot more to Git than
what we cover in this exercise.
To get started go to your convenient
location on your computer and
then create a folder named git-test.
Then, open this folder
in your favorite editor.
Here, I have the GIT-TEST folder
that we just created open in
my Visual Studio Code.
Let me add a file to this
folder named index.html,
now you can see that I have added in some
HTML code into this index.html file.
Let's save the changes.
Now let's switch to our command line,
at the command line go to
the git-test folder, and
let's initialize this folder
to be a git repository.
So to do that at the command
line type git init.
Now, this folder has been
initialized to be a git repository.
So this is our first git command
that we have learnt, git init.
This initializes the current
folder as a git repository and
when it initializes the folder,
it will mark that folder as a master.
This is the master branch for my kit.
Now let's not worry about branches and
so on,
we will not deal with that in this course.
We will only be working with the master
branch, in this particular specialization.
So this would be marked as a master.
Now this is the initial
point of our repository.
The next command that we're
going to look at is git status.
If you type git status
in the command line,
it'll tell you the current
status of the folder.
So let's do that at the command line and
see what it shows.
At the command line, type git status and
read the information that is
tapped out on the command window.
You see that it says on branch master, so
that is the master branch that we add on.
And it says, untracked files,
and then shows index.html in red.
On your specific computer,
it may be using different colors or
represent this differently or
this is what it shows on my Mac.
So now, this index.html file that
we have just created in this folder
is now not been added
to our git repository.
So let's go ahead and
add that file to the git repository.
So to do that, we say, git add,
and you can simply say dot,
which means that all the files in
the current directory will be added to
what is called as the staging
area of my git repository.
So now, if I again type git status,
you will see that the file
index.html is marked in green.
And it says, changes to be committed there
and then shows the file name and then so
that means that this file is now ready
to be committed to my git repository.
So, the next command
that we saw was git add.
By using git add you can add file or
folders to that staging area.
So once you add it to the staging area,
then you can commit that snapshot
of our folder status
to our git repository.
So that means that when
you do the git commit,
what this command will
do is commit the current
state of our folders into
our git repositories.
So all the files as they
exist at the moment,
once they have been staged using the git
add, then they will be committed to our
git repository when we execute
the git command folder.
So at this point when we execute
the git command, then our initial
state will now be changed to the first
commit to the git repository.
So let's go ahead and do that.
Back at the command prompt,
let's type git commit.
And then we can even add
a message to our commit.
So I'm going to say git commit -m "first
commit" because this is our
commit to our git repository.
So when I do that, it says, okay, 1 file
has been added to the git repository and
some other information will be
typed out on to the command window.
So let's now check again, git status and
now you see that it says nothing to
commit, working directory is clean.
So what it means is that the current
state of my working directory or
working folder has been committed
to the git repository, so
a snapshot has been committed
to my git repository.
Now, I can type the next command
called git log --oneline,
and see that it shows a number there,
an eight digit number there,
and then also it shows the message that we
put into our commit saying first commit.
So that is the log of all the commits that
have been put into my git repository.
So, going back to our next git command,
we saw that git log --oneline
will show us a brief
log of all the commits.
If you simply type git log
display a lot more detailed
information about all the commits.
But this is sufficient enough for
obtaining information that we require.
Let's now come back to our editor here,
in Visual Studio Code,
so I'm going to add more
changes to my index.html file.
I have changed my index.html file.
Now, let me add another folder
under the git test folder, so
I will create a subfolder here
named templates, and inside these
templates folder, I'm going to
create another file name, test.html.
This is just to show you how git
can commit entire folder
hierarchy into its repository.
So with test.html now there, I'm just
going to copy everything
from my index.html
into my test.html, and save the changes.
Going back to the command line,
let's now check out the status of
our git repository and this folder.
So type in git status, shows that
the index status html file that we have
already handed earlier to the repository
has now been modified, so there is
a newer version of the index.html file.
Also, it shows that
there are some untracked
files in this folder called templates.
Let's add all these changes to the staging
the area, so again, type git add.
And then all these files will
be added to the staging area.
Again, checking out the status.
You now see that changes that have
been added to the staging area.
So all these files have been
added to the staging area.
Let's do one more commit, so
I would say git commit -m,
second commit and
then let's check out the log.
If you check out the log,
you'll now see that there are two commits
in my git repository,
the first and the second commit.
And note that each one of them is
given a different number there.
If you want to see their
full details of the log,
you can type simply, git log and
then you'll receive more details in there.
Then what you would be interested in.
So, notice that the oneline
commit only gives the first
few characters of my commit number there.
That is sufficient enough for
us to operate with.
Let me now go back again to my
Visual Studio, and then add one more.
One more line to my index.html file.
So now my index.html
file has been modified.
And let's save the changes.
Going back to the command line, doing git
status shows that index.html
file has been modified.
So let's add this to the staging area,
and then do a third commit.
So let's say, git add.,
git status,
now you see that the index.html
the modified version has been added.
Now we can say git commit.
"third commit" and do git log --oneline,
and you see there are three
commits in our repository.
So now our repository contains
snapshots of three different points,
at the end of the first commit,
at the end of the second commit, and
at the end of the third commit.
Now, we also can roll back changes,
we can revert the repository
to a previous version.
We can pull out a file
from an older commit, and
then replace the existing
directory from the old commit.
So, let's see how we can
operate with these things
by learning a couple of more commands.
At this stage, our index.html
file is in the current state.
So you can notice that it has an h1 and
two ps.
Let's now look at the next git command.
The next git command that we are going to
learn about is git checkout.
So this checkout command
allows us to check out a file
from a previous commit
in our git repository.
So if we don't like the current
file that we have in our folder and
we want to go back to your
previous version of the file,
we can always check out the file
from a previous commit or
from the current commit and
then continue to work with that file.
So let's make use of this and see some
further changes to our git repository.
Going back to our command line,
we remember that, between the second and
the third commit,
I made changes to my index.html file.
Suppose I want to revert back to
the index.html file from my second commit.
So then, I can simply say,
git checkout 900cfcf.
So that is commit identify the number
that identifies the particular commit,
and then I can say index.html, and
what you would notice is that,
that older file will now be checked
out into my current working directory.
Going to my Visual Studio Code,
you'll now notice that my index.html file
has reverted to the previous working so,
the change that I made before
the third commit it is now gone.
So my index.html file has been restored to
its state at the end of the second commit.
Now, at the command line,
if I try git status,
you'll notice that this index.html
file which was reverted
to what it was at the end of the second
commit, it has now already been staged.
So using this git checkout, we'll pull
out an older version of the file,
and then replace what is in
the current directory, and
then it'll also check it
into the staging area.
So now if I do that and
then I realize that this is what I want,
I can simply do another
commit at this point.
And then that file can be
committed as the fourth commit.
But suppose I don't like this,
I want to double
to back to the index.html
file at the end of
the third commit then all
I can do is say git reset,
HEAD and index.html.
So at this point,
what happens is that the index.html,
the modified version that I had
checked out is still there but
this file has been unstaged
from the staging area.
If you go back and
look at the index.html in your editor,
it will still show the state at
the end of the second commit.
Because we had pulled out
the file using checkout for that.
Now, if you want to revert it back to what
it was at the end of the third commit,
then we do one more checkout from
the third commit going to our
command window, type git status and
you would notice that the index.html
is marked as modified.
But it also shows this
particular statement here.
It says git checkout -- and
the file name, to discard the changes
in the working directories.
So that's one way you can discard the
changes that you have made to a particular
file corresponding to
the previous comment.
So let me just restore that index.html
back to what it was at the end of
the third commit.
So to do that,
I could simply say git, checkout,
-- index.html and then,
if I do git status,
it shows that my directory is clean.
And basically my directory
has been restored to
the state at the end of the third commit.
Going to the file in my
Virtual Studio Code, I see that
their file has been restored back to
what it was at the end of the third cap.
So this is one way you can,
if you have made changes to your
file after the commit and
you want to just discard those changes,
you can simply check out the file from
the last commit, and then all your
changes that you've done after the last
commit will be discarded on the spot.
So these are some basic commands
that are very useful for
you as you go through the courses
in this specialization
because you may want to commit
at the end of each exercise.
And as you proceed forward,
you would still have a guided vision of
the state of your folder at
the end of the previous exercise.
So that way, if you're carrying out a new
exercise and you've discovered that you've
made mistakes and you want to
revert back to the previous commit,
you always have a way of doing that using
the commands that we have just let.
So with this basic understanding
of this few git commands,
you'll be able to proceed
forward with understanding and
using git in the courses
of this specialization.
So now, we have reviewed the git reset for
a specific file or git reset in general.
If you simply type git reset,
it'll restore you back to the last commit.
So it will reset the staging
area to the last commit,
without disturbing the changes that you
have done to your working directory.
So once you reset, then you can check out
the previous version of the file that you
have committed in the previous commit.
So this week, you can restore your
folder back to the where you were at
the starting point of the previous commit.
So sometimes when you are going through an
exercise and you realize you missed a cue.
Always have a way of reverting
back to a previous version.
So with these commands,
I think you're all set to go ahead to
use git in the courses
of this specialization.
So at the end of this exercise,
did you Git it?
[MUSIC]